# JMMP GO model development meeting minutes

*Thursday 18th September 2025*

*Participants:* 

*Apologies:* 

*The rota for minuting follows JMMP people surname in alphabetical order: IA, AB, EB, DB, DC, **EF**, CG, AM, DSc, DS, OT, AW. (This was listed in the minutes of Nov 2024).  We only minute the quarterly meetings, not the monthly ones.*

----------

## Agenda:

1. Update on latest experiments and results with NEMOv5 RK3 60 min vs MLF 30 min; we will present this at the NEMO System Team meeting taking place on the same day 13:30-14:30
2. GOSI workflows - Monsoon3
3. Update on nemo_cookbook and long-term integration plan with `MARINE_VAL`
4. Licensing of JMMP-generated software/public repositories
5. AOB / DONM

## Actions from last meeting:

- [ ] (AB) Check and send any details on strong -ve temperatures at ice shelf to SK and CP.
- [ ] (AW) Liaise with MO staff to run marine_assess on JRA runoff test suite.
- [ ] (All) Be proactive about transferring workflows to Monsoon3.
- [ ] (AA) Send out agenda ~1 week ahead of the next quarterly meeting (Aug 14th, pending quorum) and ask EB to minute the meeting.

----------

## Minutes:

----------

## Actions:

* **Date of next meeting**: 
